Launch week: Improving PostHog deployments (#3175)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/improving-posthog-deployments.md

---
date: "2022-03-22"
title: "Improving PostHog deployments"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true

> featuredImage: ../images/blog/launch-week-teaser.jpeg # TODO

Author: @andyvan-ph @lottiecoxon do we have a launch week image we can use?

Reviewer: Yup, I will add

---
date: 2022-03-22
title: "Improving PostHog deployments"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/launch-week-teaser.jpeg # TODO
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Engineering", "Product updates", "Launch week"]
author: ["harry-waye", "guido-iaquinti"]
---

When PostHog was born in 2020, it was a simple Python application (Django + Celery) backed by a PostgreSQL datastore. Troubleshooting was easy, while the low barrier of entry meant fast adoption and more feedback on where to take the product.

This was great at the start, but it couldn't last. More customers meant more data to ingest and analyze. Our ingestion couldn’t keep up with the volumes of events we were receiving, and our event queries using PostgreSQL were slow. If we wanted PostHog to scale, we had to revisit our stack:

> TODO: insert slowly moving hedgehog image

Author: Same here

Reviewer: Don't think we have anything like this, so we'll have to leave out for now

> TODO: insert slowly moving hedgehog image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
date: 2022-03-22

> title: "Improving PostHog deployments"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Improving testing and monitoring PostHog deployments"
```

> title: "Improving testing and monitoring of PostHog deployments"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How we’re making PostHog deployments easier"
```

---
date: 2022-03-22
title: "Improving PostHog deployments"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/simpler-self-deployments.png
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Engineering", "Product updates", "Launch week"]
author: ["harry-waye", "guido-iaquinti"]
---

When PostHog was born in 2020, it was a simple Python application (Django + Celery) backed by a PostgreSQL datastore. Troubleshooting was easy, while the low barrier of entry meant fast adoption and more feedback on where to take the product.

> This was great at the start, but it couldn't last. More customers meant more data to ingest and analyze. Our ingestion couldn’t keep up with the volumes of events we were receiving, and our event queries using PostgreSQL were slow. If we wanted PostHog to scale, we had to revisit our stack:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This was great at the start, but it couldn't last. More customers meant more data to ingest and analyze. Our ingestion couldn’t keep up with the volumes of events we were receiving, and our event queries using PostgreSQL were slow. If we wanted PostHog to scale, we had to revisit our stack.
```

Here's what our architecture looks like now.

```mermaid
graph TD
    CLIENT[Client Library]
    DECIDE["/decide API"]
    CAPTURE[Capture API]
    PLUGINS[Plugin server]
    PERSONS["PostgreSQL (persons table)"]
    Kafka2[Kafka]

    CLIENT -..-> DECIDE

    CLIENT -..-> CAPTURE
    CAPTURE --> Kafka

    Kafka <-..- PLUGINS

    PLUGINS <--> PERSONS
    PLUGINS --> Kafka2

    Kafka2 <-..- ClickHouse
```

While powerful, this new architecture has created the following challenges:

* We now have additional distributed services like Kafka, ClickHouse and Zookeeper to deploy and manage.

* Each additional dependency requires considerations in terms of monitoring, migrations, upgrades, durability among others.

* ClickHouse is a relatively new product. Whereas tooling around PostgreSQL is very mature, we need to do some of the heavy lifting ourselves with ClickHouse.

* Very few people know or have experience with managing a ClickHouse cluster relative to PostgreSQL. Our [partnerhship with Altinity](/blog/posthog-altinity-announce), which offers 24/7 technical support for ClickHouse, and bespoke training, is another way we're addressing this challenge. 

> * Simple operations such as application deployments or database upgrades have become complex automations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Simple operations such as application deployments or database upgrades have become complex automations.
```

To address this complexity and make PostHog easier to deploy, maintain and use for anyone, we gave ourselves two goals: **improve our test framework** and **improve our built-in monitoring**.

> This post is all about how we approached these goals, and our long-term roadmap for improving PostHog deployments.

Reviewer 2: I'd cut this line tbh. 60 lines in, the reader should know what the post is about and standalone the meaning of this line is redundant.

> This post is all about how we approached these goals, and our long-term roadmap for improving PostHog deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
date: "2022-03-18" # TODO
title: "Improving PostHog deployments"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/launch-week-teaser.jpeg # TODO
featuredImageType: full
categories: ["Engineering", "Product updates", "Launch week"]
author: ["harry-waye", "guido-iaquinti"]
---

PostHog was born in 2020 as an analytics product consisting of a Python application (Django + Celery) backed by a PostgreSQL datastore. The simple architecture was very easy to understand and troubleshoot. This simplicity was perfect for this stage and of the key selling points of PostHog is that users don’t need to surrender their data to a third party but instead run PostHog on their own infrastructure.

The more simple the setup and maintenance, the lower the barrier of entry, and the more feedback we received on where to take the product.

> TODO: <insert diagram of event data flow from [here](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://posthog.com/handbook/engineering/databases/event-ingestion&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1647446368828545&usg=AOvVaw31KohI1YJiLlpt2SX8wP8P)>

Reviewer 3: I think the best way is too copy the mermail code inline

* We now have additional distributed services like Kafka, ClickHouse and Zookeeper to deploy and manage.

* Each additional dependency requires considerations in terms of monitoring, migrations, upgrades, durability among others.

* ClickHouse is powerful but relatively new compared to PostgreSQL, very few people know or have experience with managing a ClickHouse cluster.

* ClickHouse is a relatively new product. Whereas tooling around PostgreSQL for example is very mature, we need to do some of the heavy lifting ourselves with ClickHouse.

PostHog is built on the idea that anyone should be able to deploy, maintain and use it. We may be experts, but our users should not need to be.

Adding distributed systems to our stack also increased its complexity (we also had to bring 3rd party dependencies like Zookeeper) and what was initially an architecture easy to understand, deploy and maintain suddenly became more complex. Simple operations such as application deployments or database upgrades have now become complex automations handling distributed systems. Supporting self-hosted and non-self-hosted installations without increasing complexity has thus become a major challenge.

> To self-host PostHog, it is still possible to use docker-compose for the evaluation stage, but what about the move into production? We currently offer an abstraction system built on top of the [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) platform via [Helm](https://helm.sh/). We’ve built on top of Kubernetes because although for many scenarios it is overkill, it allows us to focus on one abstraction but target any cloud provider that has a Kubernetes offerings. Currently we support AWS, Azure (alpha), Digital Ocean and Google Cloud Platform.

Reviewer: This section kind of breaks the flow a bit at the moment, but adds useful context for techincal users. Maybe we could put this in a boxout as an aside, or under its own heading?

Author: Done!

## Goal 1: Improve test framework

In order to give us confidence that every self-hosted installation is reliable and we iterate fast we needed to significantly improve our testing frameworks.
Kubernetes resources are usually represented as YAML objects, while Helm helps us to define, install, upgrade and package them via a template engine.

In order to make sure those resources are defined, installed and upgrade correctly across different cloud platforms, Kubernetes versions and deployment scenarios, we’ve recently introduced several layers of testing, each of which with a specific goal:

* lint tests (via Helm lint): to verify if the Helm templates can be rendered without errors

> unit tests (via [`quintush/helm-unittest`](https://github.com/quintush/helm-unittest)): to verify if the rendered Helm templates are behaving as we expect

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* unit tests (via [`quintush/helm-unittest`](https://github.com/quintush/helm-unittest)): to verify if the rendered Helm templates are behaving as we expect
```

* template is valid and got rendered as we expect, works on all supported Kubernetes version, but it doesn’t work on a specific implementation of a cloud provider

TODO: <insert cherry-picks of non-trivial CI failures>

Those tests are helping us to identify and fix several bugs in our implementation, catching regressions before code gets released and enabling us to iterate faster than ever.

For more information about the technical implementation, take a look [here](https://github.com/PostHog/charts-clickhouse#testing).

## Goal 2: Improve built-in monitoring

When you can successfully deploy a stack you are only half way in the journey. Making sure your stack is properly monitored is key in order to run and maintain a successful installation.

To simplify this task for our self-hosting users, in the last couple of months we’ve improved the built-in monitoring we provide as part of PostHog by leveraging best in class open source components like Grafana, Prometheus and various service exporters.

We create new templated dashboards, when we identify better metrics to monitor and techniques to debug an installation and make them available to everyone in the next release.

> Thanks to this work, you can now get critical  insights about the majority of PostHog services by simply enabling the monitoring features in the Helm chart (see our [docs](https://posthog.com/docs/self-host/deploy/configuration) for more info).

Reviewer: Can we get some screenshots of the dashboards here, please?

Author: Done!

## What’s next?

> Improving deployments for PostHog Cloud and our self-hosting customer is an effort we will keep investing in. Few of the projects we have in our roadmaps are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improving deployments for PostHog Cloud and our self-hosting customers is an effort we will keep investing in. Here's a sneak peak at some of the projects in our roadmap:
```

- keep improving our chart to align to Kubernetes best practices

> - add support for more cloud platforms

Reviewer: Could we be more specific here? What platforms are we planning to support?

Author: There isn’t a specific plan (yet) but we now have a proper test infrastructure to support more of them without having to scale linearly our efforts.

- enhance our observability stack by integrating [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) across all our components and systems

> _Interested on chatting about those topics? Send us an email: [engineering@posthog.com](mailto:engineering@posthog.com)_ # TODO: verify this is a valid email

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Interested on chatting about those topics? Send us an email: [engineering@posthog.com](mailto:engineering@posthog.com)_ # TODO: verify this is a valid email or [join our community Slack](/slack).
```

This was great at the start, but it couldn't last. More customers meant more data to ingest and analyze. Our ingestion couldn’t keep up with the volumes of events we were receiving, and our event queries using PostgreSQL were slow. If we wanted PostHog to scale, we had to revisit our stack:

Introducing Kafka helped us to decouple our data streams and our processing pipeline, while [ClickHouse helped us to deliver very fast queries](/blog/clickhouse-announcement) on a large volume of data and more horizontal scaling capabilities. These additions helped us scale, but they came at a cost: complexity.

> Here's what our architecture looks like now.

Author: ```suggestion
Here's how our ingestion pipeline looks like now:
```
